Slice a donut with a moving plane—watch the loops appear and disappear.
We track level sets: intersection of the torus with a horizontal plane.
First touch at the bottom: a single loop is born.
Between critical heights, the slice is two disjoint loops circling the torus.
At the middle height, the slice straddles the hole: a saddle level.
Climbing toward the top, the two loops draw together.
At the top critical height they merge into one loop.
Above it, the level set vanishes: no loops remain.
Component count by height: 0 → 1 → 2 → 1 → 0.
Changes happen only at critical heights of the height function on the torus.
This Morse–Bott picture encodes topology: handles appear as loops split and merge.
Morse theory: topology from the movie of slices.